+++
title = "A connectome-based, corticothalamic model of state- and stimulation-dependent modulation of rhythmic neural activity and connectivity"
date = 2020-01-30T00:00:00
draft = false

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["John D. Griffiths", "Anthony R. McIntosh", "Jérémie Lefebvre"]


# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference paper
# 2 = Journal article
# 3 = Manuscript
# 4 = Report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book section
publication_types = ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
#publication = "Frontiers in Applied Mathematics and Statistics"
#publication_short = "Front. Appl. Math Stat."
publication = "(Submitted)"
publication_short = "(Submitted)"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Rhythmic activity in the brain fluctuates with behaviour and cognitive state, through a combination of coexisting and interacting frequencies. At large spatial scales such as those studied in human M/EEG, measured oscillatory dynamics are believed to arise primarily from a combination of cortical (intracolumnar) and corticothalamic rhythmogenic mechanisms. Whilst considerable progress has been made in characterizing these two types of neural circuit separately, relatively little work has been done that attempts to unify them into a single consistent picture. This is the aim of the present paper. We present and examine a whole-brain, connectome-based neural mass model with detailed long-range cortico-cortical connectivity and strong, recurrent corticothalamic circuitry. This system reproduces a variety of known features of human M/EEG recordings, including spectral peaks at canonical frequencies, and functional connectivity structure that is shaped by the underlying anatomical connectivity. Importantly, our model is able to capture state- (e.g., idling/active) dependent fluctuations in oscillatory activity and the coexistence of multiple oscillatory phenomena, as well as frequency-specific modulation of functional connectivity. We find that increasing the level of sensory drive to the thalamus triggers a suppression of the dominant low frequency rhythms generated by corticothalamic loops, and subsequent disinhibition of higher frequency endogenous rhythmic behaviour of intracolumnar microcircuits. These combine to yield simultaneous decreases in lower frequency and increases in higher frequency components of the M/EEG power spectrum during states of high sensory or cognitive drive. Building on this, we also explored the effect of pulsatile brain stimulation on ongoing oscillatory activity, and evaluated the impact of coexistent frequencies and state-dependent fluctuations on the response of cortical networks. Our results provide new insight into the role played by cortical and corticothalamic circuits in shaping intrinsic brain rhythms, and suggest new directions for brain stimulation therapies aimed at state-and frequency-specific control of oscillatory brain activity."

abstract_short = ""

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references 
#   `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
#projects = ["models-of-brain-dynamics"]
# projects = ["models_of_brain_dynamics"]
projects = ["brain_rhythms", "brain_networks", "brain_stimulation"]

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = []

# Links (optional).
#url_pdf = "http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/352095/1/Cushen-IMV2013.pdf"
#url_preprint = "http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/352095/1/Cushen-IMV2013.pdf"
#url_code = "#"
#url_dataset = "#"
#url_project = ""
#url_slides = "#"
#url_video = "#"
#url_poster = "#"
#url_source = "#"

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
#url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "http://example.org"}]
url_custom = [{name = "PDF", url = "https://tinyurl.com/5457mfmk"}]

# Digital Object Identifier (DOI)
doi = "10.3389/fncom.2020.575143"

# Does this page contain LaTeX math? (true/false)
math = true

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
#[image]
#  # Caption (optional)
#  #caption = "Image credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com/photos/pLCdAaMFLTE)"
#  # Focal point (optional)
#  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
#  focal_point = ""
+++
